Script for Video 15: Forms and Protocol Bindings (#235)
w3c/wot-cg: Tutorials/whatiswot/15-Protocol_Level/README.md

# Video 15: Forms and Protocol Bindings

## Table of Contents

- Introduction
- What are Protocol Bindings?
- Forms Structure
    - WoT Operations
    - Protocol and URI
    - Content Type

>     - Protocol Specific Vocabulary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Protocol-Specific Vocabulary
```

- Protocol Bindings in Practice
    - HTTP
    - CoAP
    - MQTT
    - Modbus
- Summary

### Introduction

In the previous tutorial, we explored Interaction Affordances - properties, actions and events, and how they describe what a Thing can do. In this video, we will focus on the next important question: How do those interactions actually happen over the network?

In the Web of Things, this is handled through protocol bindings. Protocol bindings define how a Consumer communicates with a Thing using concrete protocols like HTTP, CoAP, MQTT, etc.

### What are Protocol Bindings?

> A protocol binding maps an interaction affordance - such as reading a property or invoking an action, to a specific communication protocol and endpoint. By the end of this video, you'll understand how the Consumer knows where to send a request, which protocol to use, and how to encode the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A protocol binding maps an interaction affordance - such as reading a property or invoking an action, to a specific communication protocol, endpoint and the parameters required by the protocol. By the end of this video, you'll understand how the Consumer knows where to send a request, which protocol to use, and how to encode the data.
```

### Forms Structure

A form describes a single way to interact with an affordance over a specific protocol. It can be thought of as a simple instruction to the Consumer: "To perform this type of operation on this interaction, send a request in this way to this address." Now let's break down the key parts of a form.

#### WoT Operations

Each form can declare one or more operations, using the `op` field. Operations describe what semantic action the client can perform - for example: reading or writing a property, invoking an action or subscribing to an event. These operation types are defined by the WoT specification and are independent of any specific protocol and you can find a full list on the TD specification page.

> If `op` is omitted, default operations are inferred based on the affordance type. For example, a property form is assumed to support readproperty unless stated otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each form can declare one or more operations, using the `op` field. Operations describe what semantic action(s) the client can perform — for example: reading or writing a property, invoking an action, or subscribing to an event. These operation types are defined by the WoT specification and are independent of any specific protocol. You can find a full list on the TD specification page.

If `op` is omitted, default operations are inferred based on the affordance type. For example, a property form is assumed to support `readproperty` unless stated otherwise.
```

#### Protocol and URI

The most important field in a form is `href`. The `href` is a URI that tells the client where to interact with the Thing and which protocol to use. The protocol is inferred directly from the URI scheme.
- https:// -> HTTP
- coap:// -> CoAP

> - mqtt:// -> MQTT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important field in a form is `href`. The `href` is a URI that tells the client where to interact with the Thing and which protocol to use. The protocol is inferred directly from the URI scheme.
- `https://` -> HTTP
- `coap://` -> CoAP
- `mqtt://` -> MQTT
```

This design allows a Thing Description to stay protocol-agnostic while still enabling concrete interactions. A single affordance can expose multiple forms as well, offering the same interaction over different protocols.

#### Content Type

Forms can also specify a `contentType`, which tells the client how the payload is encoded. Common examples include:
- application/json
- application/cbor
- text/plain

> This ensures that both the Thing and the Consumer agree on how data is serialized and parsed. If no content type is specified, protocol-specific defaults may apply, but explicitly defining it improves interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that both the Thing and the Consumer agree on how data is serialized and parsed. If no content type is specified, protocol-specific defaults may apply, but explicitly declaring them improves interoperability.
```

> #### Protocol Specific Vocabulary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Protocol-Specific Vocabulary
```

      {
        "href": "https://coffee.example.com/properties/coffeeBeansLeft",
        "op": "readproperty",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Here, the form tells the Consumer that it can read the property `coffeeBeansLeft` using HTTP and expects a JSON response. Because this is a readproperty operation, the Consumer knows to perform an HTTP GET request.

#### CoAP

CoAP is a lightweight protocol designed for constrained devices and low-power networks. It provides a similar interaction model to HTTP, but with much lower overhead, making it suitable for embedded systems and IoT deployments with limited resources.

Let's use CoAP to invoke the `brewCoffee` action:

```json
"actions": {
  "brewCoffee": {
    "title": "Brew Coffee",
    "description": "Starts brewing a cup of coffee",
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "size": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": ["small", "medium", "large"]
        }
      }
    },
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "coap://coffee.example.com/actions/brewCoffee",
        "op": "invokeaction",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> This time, the form uses a `coap://` URI to indicate CoAP instead of HTML. From the Consumer's perspective, invoking the action works the same as with HTTP - the only difference is the underlying protocol, which is optimized for constrained devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This time, the form uses a `coap://` URI to indicate CoAP instead of HTTP. From the Consumer's perspective, invoking the action works the same as with HTTP - the only difference is the underlying protocol, which is optimized for constrained devices.
```

A form describes a single way to interact with an affordance over a specific protocol. It can be thought of as a simple instruction to the Consumer: "To perform this type of operation on this interaction, send a request in this way to this address." Now let's break down the key parts of a form.

#### WoT Operations

Each form can declare one or more operations, using the `op` field. Operations describe what semantic action(s) the client can perform — for example: reading or writing a property, invoking an action, or subscribing to an event. These operation types are defined by the WoT specification and are independent of any specific protocol. You can find a full list on the TD specification.

If `op` is omitted, default operations are inferred based on the affordance type. For example, forms of a readable property are assumed to include the `readproperty` operation unless stated otherwise.

#### Protocol and URI

The most important field in a form is `href`. The `href` is a URI that tells the client where to interact with the Thing and which protocol to use. The protocol is inferred directly from the URI scheme.
- `https://` -> HTTP
- `coap://` -> CoAP
- `mqtt://` -> MQTT

> This design allows a Thing Description to stay protocol-agnostic while still enabling concrete interactions. A single affordance can expose multiple forms as well, offering the same interaction over different protocols.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This design allows the Thing Description concept to stay protocol-agnostic while still enabling concrete protocol-level interactions. A single affordance can expose multiple forms as well, offering the same interaction over different protocols.
```

#### Content Type

Forms can also specify a `contentType`, which tells the client how the payload is encoded. Common examples include:
- `application/json` -> JSON
- `application/cbor` -> CBOR
- `text/plain` -> TEXT

This ensures that both the Thing and the Consumer agree on how data is serialized and parsed. If no content type is specified, protocol-specific defaults may apply, but explicitly declaring them improves interoperability.

#### Protocol-Specific Vocabulary

While WoT aims to stay protocol-independent, forms allow protocol-specific extensions when needed. These are expressed through additional fields defined in protocol binding specifications.

### Protocol Bindings in Practice

> Now that we understand the structure of forms, let's see how protocol bindings work in practice. When a Consumer wants to interact with a Thing, it does not need any prior knowledge about the protocol being used. Instead, it reads the Thing Description, looks at the available forms, and selects one it understands.  Let's revisit our smart coffee machine example from the last video and fill out the forms for our interaction affordances so far.

Reviewer 2: > When a Consumer wants to interact with a Thing, it does not need any prior knowledge about the protocol being used.

When you want to write a Consumer application, you don't need any prior knowledge about the protocol being used.

``` json
{
  "properties": {
    "coffeeBeansLeft": {
      "title": "Remaining Coffee Beans",
      "description": "Amount of remaining coffee beans in grams",
      "type": "number",
      "minimum": 0,
      "maximum": 500,
      "readOnly": true,
      "observable": false,
      "forms": [ ... ]
    }
  },
  "actions": {
    "brewCoffee": {
      "title": "Brew Coffee",
      "description": "Starts brewing a cup of coffee",
      "input": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "size": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": ["small", "medium", "large"]
          }
        }
      },
      "forms": [ ... ]
    }
  },
  "events": {
    "lowOnWater": { 
        "title": "Low Water Level",
        "forms": [ ... ]
    }
  }
}

```

> #### HTTP

Reviewer 2: before this, we should say: we will quickly show how forms can look like and what it means for the following protocols: HTTP, CoAP, MQTT and Modbus.

      {
        "href": "https://coffee.example.com/properties/coffeeBeansLeft",
        "op": "readproperty",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Here, the form tells the Consumer that it can read the property `coffeeBeansLeft` using HTTP and expects a JSON response. Because this is a readproperty operation, the Consumer knows to perform an HTTP GET request.

#### CoAP

CoAP is a lightweight protocol designed for constrained devices and low-power networks. It provides a similar interaction model to HTTP, but with much lower overhead, making it suitable for embedded systems and IoT deployments with limited resources.

Let's use CoAP to invoke the `brewCoffee` action:

```json
"actions": {
  "brewCoffee": {
    "title": "Brew Coffee",
    "description": "Starts brewing a cup of coffee",
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "size": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": ["small", "medium", "large"]
        }
      }
    },
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "coap://coffee.example.com/actions/brewCoffee",
        "op": "invokeaction",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> This time, the form uses a `coap://` URI to indicate CoAP instead of HTTP. From the Consumer's perspective, invoking the action works the same as with HTTP — the only difference is the underlying protocol, which is optimized for constrained devices.

Reviewer 2: Also adding cov:method and POST -> all such things should be clear.
cbor can be also used instead of JSON

#### MQTT

```json
"events": {
  "lowOnWater": {

>     "title": "Low Water Level",

Reviewer 2: data would be nice to put since it will help with the animation

    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "mqtt://broker.example.com/coffee/events/lowOnWater",
        "op": "subscribeevent",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

MQTT is a lightweight, publish/subscribe messaging protocol that is ideal for connecting IoT devices and low-power hardware over constrained networks. Instead of direct requests, Consumers publish messages to topics or subscribe to receive updates.

#### Modbus

> Modbus is a traditional industrial protocol widely used in automation and control systems. While it predates modern web technologies, WoT protocol bindings make it possible to expose Modbus-based devices through a standardized Thing Description. This allows legacy industrial equipment to be integrated into modern web-based systems, without changing the underlying protocol.

Reviewer 2: Example is needed and maybe this one can be explained a bit since it will surprise people. `While it predates modern web technologies, WoT protocol bindings make it possible to expose Modbus-based devices through a standardized Thing Description.` is nice to have here :)

# Video 15: Forms and Protocol Bindings

## Table of Contents

- Introduction
- What are Protocol Bindings?
- Forms Structure
    - WoT Operations
    - Protocol and URI
    - Content Type
    - Protocol-Specific Vocabulary
- Protocol Bindings in Practice
    - HTTP
    - CoAP
    - MQTT
    - Modbus
- Summary

### Introduction

In the previous tutorial, we explored Interaction Affordances — properties, actions, and events — and how they describe what a Thing can do. In this video, we will focus on the next important question: How do those interactions actually happen over the network?

> In the Web of Things, this is handled through protocol bindings. Protocol bindings define how a Consumer communicates with a Thing using concrete protocols like HTTP, CoAP, MQTT, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Web of Things, this is handled through bindings. Bindings define how a Consumer communicates with a Thing using concrete protocols like HTTP, CoAP, MQTT, etc. or how the data is serialized, such as JSON, text or CBOR.
```

> ### What are Protocol Bindings?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What are Bindings?
```

> A protocol binding maps an operation of an interaction affordance — such as reading a property or invoking an action — to a specific network message: communication protocol and endpoint, and the parameters required by the protocol. By the end of this video, you'll understand how the Consumer knows where to send a request, which protocol to use, and how to encode the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A binding maps an operation of an interaction affordance — such as reading a property or invoking an action — to a specific network message: communication protocol and endpoint, and the parameters required by the protocol. By the end of this video, you'll understand how the Consumer knows where to send a request, which protocol to use, and how to encode the data.
```

{
  "properties": {
    "coffeeBeansLeft": {
      "title": "Remaining Coffee Beans",
      "description": "Amount of remaining coffee beans in grams",
      "type": "number",
      "minimum": 0,
      "maximum": 500,
      "readOnly": true,
      "observable": false,
      "forms": [ ... ]
    }
  },
  "actions": {
    "brewCoffee": {
      "title": "Brew Coffee",
      "description": "Starts brewing a cup of coffee",
      "input": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "size": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": ["small", "medium", "large"]
          }
        }
      },
      "forms": [ ... ]
    }
  },
  "events": {
    "lowOnWater": { 
        "title": "Low Water Level",
        "forms": [ ... ]
    }
  }
}

```

#### HTTP

```json
"properties": {
  "coffeeBeansLeft": {
    "title": "Remaining Coffee Beans",
    "description": "Amount of remaining coffee beans in grams",
    "type": "number",
    "readOnly": true,
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "https://coffee.example.com/properties/coffeeBeansLeft",
        "op": "readproperty",
        "contentType": "application/json",
        "htv:methodName": "GET"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> Here, the form tells the Consumer that it can read the property `coffeeBeansLeft` using HTTP and expects a JSON response. Because this is a readproperty operation, the Consumer knows to perform an HTTP GET request.

Reviewer 2: HTTP GET is explicitely written. So the second sentence should be adapted.

#### CoAP

Let's use CoAP to invoke the `brewCoffee` action:

```json
"actions": {
  "brewCoffee": {
    "title": "Brew Coffee",
    "description": "Starts brewing a cup of coffee",
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "size": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": ["small", "medium", "large"]
        }
      }
    },
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "coap://coffee.example.com/actions/brewCoffee",
        "op": "invokeaction",
        "contentType": "application/cbor",
        "cov:method": "POST"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> This time, the form uses a `coap://` URI to indicate CoAP instead of HTTP. From the Consumer's perspective, invoking the action works the same as with HTTP — the only difference is the underlying protocol, which is optimized for constrained devices.

Reviewer 2: method must be mentioned

#### MQTT

```json
"events": {
  "lowOnWater": {
    "title": "Low Water Level",
    "data": {
      "type": "number",
      "description": "Remaining water level in milliliters"
    },
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "mqtt://broker.example.com/coffee/events/lowOnWater",
        "op": "subscribeevent",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> Here, the href points to an MQTT broker and topic. Instead of sending requests, the Consumer subscribes to the topic and receives event data asynchronously. The form then only describes how that data is delivered — in this case, via an MQTT broker.

Reviewer 2: consumer connects to the broker, subscribes ...

Reviewer 2: Also not how data is delivered but what the Consumer should do. BUT you should still mention that the data comes from the broker.

#### Modbus

Modbus is a traditional industrial protocol widely used in automation and control systems. While it predates modern web technologies, WoT protocol bindings make it possible to expose Modbus-based devices through a standardized Thing Description. This allows legacy industrial equipment to be integrated into modern web-based systems, without changing the underlying protocol.

```json
...
"base": "modbus+tcp://coffee-machine.example.com:502/1/",
  "properties": {
    "waterTankPresent": {
      "title": "Water Tank Present",
      "type": "boolean",
      "description": "Indicates whether the water tank is correctly inserted",
      "forms": [
        {
          "op": "readproperty",
          "href": "10003",
          "modv:function": "readDiscreteInput",
          "contentType": "application/octet-stream"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
...
```

> For example, our coffee machine has a waterTankPresent property. The form points to the correct Modbus input, and the Consumer simply reads it — no need to know Modbus itself. This way we can treat a decades-old industrial protocol the same way we treat modern web protocols. WoT effectively acts as a semantic and interaction layer on top of Modbus, bridging the gap between industrial systems and web applications.

Reviewer 2: Consumer implementation needs to know Modbus. The developer writing it does not need to, nor the user.

> For example, our coffee machine has a waterTankPresent property. The form points to the correct Modbus input, and the Consumer simply reads it — no need to know Modbus itself. This way we can treat a decades-old industrial protocol the same way we treat modern web protocols. WoT effectively acts as a semantic and interaction layer on top of Modbus, bridging the gap between industrial systems and web applications.

Reviewer 2: here it should also mention specific modbus operation

# Video 15: Forms and Protocol Bindings

## Table of Contents

- Introduction

> - What are Protocol Bindings?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- What are Bindings?
```

like below

### Forms Structure

A form describes a way to interact with an affordance over a specific protocol. It can be thought of as a simple instruction to the Consumer: "To perform this type of operation on this affordance, send a request in this way to this address." Now let's break down the key parts of a form.

#### WoT Operations

Each form can declare one or more operations, using the `op` field. Operations describe what semantic action(s) the Consumer can perform — for example: reading or writing a property, invoking an action, or subscribing to an event. These operation types are defined by the WoT specification and are independent of any specific protocol. You can find a full list on the TD specification.

If `op` is omitted, default operations are inferred based on the affordance type. For example, forms of a readable property are assumed to include the `readproperty` operation unless stated otherwise.

#### Protocol and URI

The most important field in a form is `href`. The `href` is a URI that tells the client where to interact with the Thing and which protocol to use. The protocol is inferred directly from the URI scheme.
- `https://` -> HTTP
- `coap://` -> CoAP

> - `mqtt://` -> MQTT

Reviewer 2: Thinking of beginners, it would be actually nice to put longer URIs

#### CoAP

Let's use CoAP to invoke the `brewCoffee` action:

```json
"actions": {
  "brewCoffee": {
    "title": "Brew Coffee",
    "description": "Starts brewing a cup of coffee",
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "size": {
          "type": "string",
          "enum": ["small", "medium", "large"]
        }
      }
    },
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "coap://coffee.example.com/actions/brewCoffee",
        "op": "invokeaction",
        "contentType": "application/cbor",
        "cov:method": "POST"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

This time, the form uses a `coap://` URI to indicate CoAP instead of HTTP. The `cov:method` field explicitly specifies the CoAP request method — in this case `POST` — which tells the Consumer how to invoke the action at the protocol level. From the Consumer's perspective, invoking the action works conceptually the same as with HTTP — the only difference is the underlying protocol, which is optimized for constrained devices.

> #### MQTT

Reviewer 2: let's use text/plain for the contentType

```json
"events": {
  "lowOnWater": {
    "title": "Low Water Level",
    "data": {
      "type": "number",
      "description": "Remaining water level in milliliters"
    },
    "forms": [
      {
        "href": "mqtt://broker.example.com/coffee/events/lowOnWater",
        "op": "subscribeevent",
        "contentType": "application/json"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> Here, the href points to an MQTT broker and topic. The Consumer connects to the MQTT broker, subscribes to the specified topic, and receives event data asynchronously from the broker whenever the event occurs. The form therefore describes what the Consumer needs to do — connect and subscribe — while the actual event data is delivered through the broker using MQTT.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to add at the last sentence that the Thing publishes and data gets delivered to the Consumer

> Here, the href points to an MQTT broker and topic. The Consumer connects to the MQTT broker, subscribes to the specified topic, and receives event data asynchronously from the broker whenever the event occurs. The Thing publishes event messages to the same topic, and the MQTT broker delivers those published messages to all subscribed Consumers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, the href points to an MQTT broker and topic. The Consumer connects to the MQTT broker, subscribes to the topic `coffee/events/lowOnWater`, and receives event data asynchronously from the broker whenever the event occurs. The Thing publishes event messages to the same topic, and the MQTT broker delivers those published messages to all subscribed Consumers.
```

Also mentioning the text format and number nature of the data.

#### Modbus

Modbus is a traditional industrial protocol widely used in automation and control systems. While it predates modern web technologies, WoT protocol bindings make it possible to expose Modbus-based devices through a standardized Thing Description. This allows legacy industrial equipment to be integrated into modern web-based systems, without changing the underlying protocol.

```json
...
"base": "modbus+tcp://coffee-machine.example.com:502/1/",
  "properties": {
    "waterTankPresent": {

>       "title": "Water Tank Present",

Reviewer 2: These should be also adapted to something that can be an integer like water level

      "type": "integer",
      "description": "Indicates whether the water tank is correctly inserted",
      "forms": [
        {
          "op": "readproperty",
          "href": "10003",

>           "modv:function": "readDiscreteInput",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          "modv:function": "HoldingRegister",
```

          "contentType": "application/octet-stream"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
...
```

> For example, our coffee machine has a `waterTankPresent` property. The form references the Modbus address `10003` and specifies the Modbus function using `modv:function` with the value `readDiscreteInput`, which defines the concrete Modbus operation to execute.

Reviewer 2: contentType needs to be explained. However, it is not a good to use a boolean here. numbers and strings are more common in Modbus. octet stream is just a set of bytes

Author: I've changed it to integer, the original idea I got from Example 8 [here](https://w3c.github.io/wot-binding-templates/bindings/protocols/modbus/#examples) and assumed its a realistic example:)

The Consumer implementation itself must support Modbus in order to execute this operation. However, the developer writing the Thing Description — and the user interacting with the Thing — do not need detailed knowledge of Modbus specifics. WoT effectively acts as a semantic and interaction layer on top of Modbus, bridging the gap between industrial systems and web applications.

### Summary

To summarize:

> - Protocol bindings define how interactions are executed over the network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Bindings define how interactions are executed over the network
```

```modbus
Unit ID:        0x01     (from /1/ in base URI)
Function Code:  0x03     (HoldingRegister from modv:function)
Start Address:  0x0002   (= 10003 from href)
Quantity:       0x0001   (read 1 register = 2 bytes)
```

The Thing responds with the raw register value:

```modbus
Function Code:  0x03
Byte Count:     0x02     (2 bytes for one 16-bit register)
Data:           0x01 0x12C  (= 300 decimal)
```

The Consumer receives those two bytes and interprets them as a 16-bit big-endian integer: 0x012C = 300. Because the Thing Description specifies that `waterLevel` is an integer, the WoT runtime automatically turns this into the number 300 - the water level in milliliters.

> This is WoT's value fully on display. A Consumer that only knows about `readproperty` operations and Thing Descriptions just read a binary Modbus register, without needing to know anything about function codes, register addresses, or byte encoding. All of that knowledge lived in the form, expressed through `modv:function`, `href`, and the base URI. The form is the bridge between the WoT model and the protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is WoT's value fully on display. A Consumer that only knows about `readproperty` operations and Thing Descriptions just read a binary Modbus register, without needing to know anything about function codes, register addresses, or byte encoding. All of that knowledge lived in the form, expressed through `modv:function`, `href`, and the base URI. The form is the bridge between the abstracted WoT operations and the protocol.
```
